welcome to topcast and it's episode 119
and the eighth i believe in my series on
the science of canon cat the book by
kiara marletto all about constructor
theory and today it's a video because
there's going to be diagrams movies and
even real life experiments such as are
going on in the background which you may
hear a little bit of a ticking the
motion of a
motor an engine a heat engine
specifically something called a sterling
engine
these things these objects these these
devices pieces of technology have helped
build the advanced society around us
well the explanation for their operation
comes down to the field of physics
called thermodynamics and that's what
this chapter of kiara marletto's book is
all about now let me grab a hold of this
really interesting but simple yet subtle
piece of technology
so here it is still moving actually
what it has are two surfaces one at the
bottom one at the top
the one at the bottom can be placed in
contact with a heat source and over
there that's nothing but a hot cup of
water and at the top
it's cooler hot down here
cold up here and in between is a
diaphragm and the diaphragm is moved by
gas beneath expanding because it's
heated heated gas expands increasing in
volume pushing the diaphragm up and
doing work as we call it so heat is able
to be converted into work and this basic
principle is the principle of all such
heat engines a foundational part of not
only technology physics itself and why
chiara has devoted an entire chapter of
her book in part to this phenomenon but
there's more there's a even deeper
reason why anyone would be interested in
such a thing put it back over there and
you can see that although it's stopped
now because there's no energy being
supplied we can put it back onto the hot
water
nothing happens we need to give it a
little push to get it started
and there we go we're off again so
what's happening is we have high energy
of a type that we'll talk about
throughout the course of this episode in
the water which is in the cup there
that heats the gas that's in the
cylinder here the gas when heated
expands pushing the diaphragm up it's
connected to a piston the piston drives
the spin wheel and that in theory could
be used to do work of some kind and that
is what work is force over some distance
and in theory you could hook that thing
up to a generator a generator a series
of wires moving in a magnetic field
which would generate electricity again
one of the fundamental features of our
modern civilization all down to
simple devices like this but as we'll
see although simple there's a whole
bunch of really interesting subtleties
that we're going to get to today so what
a really curious thing this is let me
grab a hold of it again being very
careful because it's actually filled
with near boiling water to get the thing
to work
and essentially there are we will come
to
three important parts of this in order
to turn the energy that's in the cup
into the energy of work the capacity to
move stuff around what that is is
somewhere that's hot
as well as somewhere that's cold there
needs to be a temperature differential
in order for there to be a transfer of
energy by heat from the hot place to the
cold place and by virtue of that
temperature difference we do get this
movement of heat and the movement of
heat that's the thing that's able to do
the work but why should it happen at all
what's really going on in terms of the
physics here well that's what we're
going to talk about in part today
i might remove the motor for the rest of
the episode otherwise i think it's
making noise in the background okay
there we go now today there won't be
many if any readings from the book
itself this is more like a prelude and
i've done this a few times i think that
the topics are so interesting that are
in the science of canon can't the topics
are so interesting in and of themselves
that sometimes i like to step outside of
the book for a moment just to discuss
some of the physics absent the book now
the reason for this is because
constructor theory remember is a new
mode of explanation a new mode of
explanation of those concepts of those
things such as as we're going to be
talking about today thermodynamics and
as we've previously talked about
knowledge and information among other
things so this constructor theoretic
mode of explanation is a new way of
looking at things things that we already
know about to try to come to a deeper
understanding of things to try and
answer some of the unanswered questions
and therefore constructor theory is
touching on topics that have a history
in science
and today is a prime example of that the
very title of the chapter work in heat
will scream out to anyone who's done
physics or chemistry the topic of
thermodynamics i might move away my
little setup here so that um i don't
spill the water any more than i already
have thermodynamics is a curious beast
it's one of those subjects at
undergraduate level where unlike quantum
theory where happily early on i was able
to sort of uncover for myself discover
by reading some popular science accounts
that the lecturers and tutors weren't
giving me the story because i found the
fabric of reality and i encountered
david deutsch through the internet so
happily i understood that my confusion
in quantum theory was warranted because
i wasn't getting the right stuff in the
lectures i had to go elsewhere in order
to find that but
unlike quantum theory thermodynamics was
a field where i got through doing
physics and not until later when i was
actually teaching the subject myself did
i realize that the way i had been taught
the subject was itself deeply riddled
with misconceptions i kind of couldn't
believe that even after studying physics
i didn't really know what a concept like
heat was i mean if you'd asked me coming
straight out of university i'm sure i
would have had an answer i would have
said something and i would have been
awarded marks on tests
and i would have been able to do
calculations of things like specific
heat capacity or thermal energy or
enthalpy changes and so on
but that's just to say of course i was
working instrumentally plugging in
numbers into equations that worked to
predict the outcome of experiments
without ever knowing what was actually
fundamentally going on you know some of
these questions are things like a heater
provides heat energy at a rate of 1000
watts to one liter of water
calculate how long it takes for the
water to change its temperature from
20 degrees celsius to its boiling point
at 100 something like that
but that whole way of asking the
question that whole way of putting the
question is itself entirely
misconceived this idea of heat flowing
or some such or thermal energy moving
from one place to another
it took me teaching this stuff and
therefore being challenged myself to
really think about this to really
understand what was happening at the
level of the particles what's flowing
from one place to another when things
are heated what's going on there why are
we using this language is is there some
substance coming out of the kettle and
if it's energy how what is this energy
it seems like it's almost a spiritual
force this energy flows out of the
heating element and into the substance
causing its temperature to rise how does
it work how does any of this work i
think i can explain it now but i don't
think i could have explained it then i
always heard for example that heat flows
from a hot body to a cold body but never
in reverse
what the heck is this thing heat that's
flowing around
well the fact is that heat is not a
thing it's not a substance and the
person that taught me that was the great
physical chemist perhaps the most famous
living thermodynamicist of all
peter atkins and it took me listening to
his lectures watching him on youtube
reading his books especially his
textbooks and his popular accounts as
well let me quote my favorite quote of
his on the topic of heat i mean there's
many many other concepts in
thermodynamics but he is possibly the
most misunderstood and subtle of all the
concepts within thermodynamics and i
find this particular distillation of
wisdom on the topic of thermodynamics
the most brilliant of all it's from one
of his popular books on thermodynamics
that i'll mention again later but atkins
wrote quote
in thermodynamics heat is not an entity
or even a form of energy heat is a mode
of transfer of energy it is not a form
of energy or a fluid of some kind or
anything of any kind
heat is the transfer of energy by virtue
of a temperature difference heat is the
name of a process
not the name of an entity so
in grammatical terms heat is more of a
verb than what it is a noun but of
course we have
casual english as well and so sometimes
it's almost unavoidable in normal
day-to-day conversation in using the
word in its less precise meaning even
when you're talking to other physicists
and so on because that's just what we've
inherited from the long history of the
use of the word and the way in which
thermodynamics began and our scientific
understanding of this began of heat
being some kind of substance or fluid
even though it's not because now we
understand better heat is the movement
of energy but what energy well it's
kinetic energy in the main and that
kinetic energy can cause increased
kinetic energy of the particles of the
cooler body by physical collisions
with particles in the hotter body so
conduction of heat in solid metal for
example happens because not this
substance heat is flowing from one place
to another there is no such substance
but rather at the hot end of a piece of
metal the particles there are vibrating
really fast and they are physically
colliding with their neighbors and that
collision goes all the way along the
solid piece of metal until you get this
transfer of energy kinetic energy the
energy of motion of vibration of these
particles from the hot part to the cold
part that's what heat is fundamentally
movement at the level of the particles
it's not only that but as a first
approximation that's a very good way to
understand what's going on there it's
not that there is this
strange substance flowing from one place
to another rather it's just a vibration
of particles and if they're vibrating in
one place they'll be colliding with
their neighbors and their enables will
collide with their neighbours and so on
and that's how conduction in for example
solids like metals happens to work now
it's not always that the
kinetic energy happens to increase if
you heat something
it can be the case that the temperature
will rise but also maybe its temperature
won't rise maybe just its state will
change state changes happen at the one
temperature by the way so for example
water typically at sea level under the
standard conditions and so on
will boil at 100 degrees celsius that
means that at that temperature the
liquid water is turning into gaseous
vapor at 100 degrees celsius the liquid
water is at 100 degrees celsius and the
vapor is at 100 degrees celsius as well
and we're going to get back to exactly
what this idea of temperature means as
well that itself is another subtle
concept that needs to be made precise by
physics this is what physics tends to do
but people can tend to have this
misconception you put water in a pot on
a stove and you boil it and one of the
first misconceptions that people have
about that process is that although they
understand that the water boils at a
particular boiling point at like 100
degrees celsius then if you continue to
apply the heat maybe the temperature
goes up and up and up you can ask people
this question if they don't remember
their high school science let's say
that's what they tend to predict after
all you're adding more heat you're
heating the water you're continuously
heating the water shouldn't the water
continue to get hot no it doesn't it
stays at 100 degrees celsius until it
all boils away when i say 100 degrees
celsius i mean assuming all the usual
conditions if you lower the air pressure
the temperature of the temperature at
which the water boils happens to be
lower as well but why are these
misconceptions well it's because the
teaching of thermodynamics around the
world
still follows this misconceived pattern
heat is strongly implied to be a fluid
of some kind such and such contains more
heat than something else now it's fine
to say something is hotter than
something else
but not to say it contains more heat
than something else and why because
again heat is not a substance it's not a
thing kinetic energy is a thing how fast
the particles are moving or vibrating
potential energy is a thing how strong
the bonds between particles happen to be
the heat is not heat is the name of a
process to heat something and having
heated something the temperature the
kinetic energy or the potential energy
stored in the bonds of the particles
will have increased the real goal i'm
reaching for in this podcast and
especially the next one is a more
precise statement of something called
the second law of thermodynamics in
terms of deeper underlying principles
are a deeper underlying theory so here's
a bit of pedagogy first a method of
teaching or learning it's been
interesting to me as i've come out of
teaching and into doing well this kind
of thing among other things that people
will sometimes ask me when i am
explaining some aspect of karl popper or
david deutscher's work some deep and
subtle part of either philosophy or
epistemology or science or physics they
desire on occasion a particularly
precise definition of certain concepts
or terms i notice david gets this when
people ask him questions as well it's
often you know if they have the
opportunity to interview david or to
discuss with him they'll say well can
you define knowledge for me can you
define optimism can you define this that
or the other and david i think i can't
speak for david but like me i guess
following in the tradition of poppa i
think has an automatic kind of aversion
to that kind of thing to
trying to define something now i'll
speak for myself here there are a couple
of reasons for that
i worry about the term definition of
being asked to define things precisely
the first is well the idea of having a
definition in people's minds i think is
supposed to capture something of the
essence of the thing you are talking
about that you are defining it's as if
you define the term and then you are
held to the definition and people find
holes in the definition but all the
while that was never your intention to
say everything that could be said about
the term so the problem with definitions
to my mind is that they have this
pretense in some people's minds anyway
of being final and unalterable this is
the perfect statement of what this term
actually means but of course that's
anti-fallibilist and inconsistent with
the broader view that we can always make
progress and learn more and it's
anti-philosophy as well as we understand
the term popper even wrote about not
wanting to quibble over definitions he
spoke about this and wrote about this in
objective knowledge now putting all that
aside the other reason to object to
providing precise definitions of things
is well i think people are enacting a
kind of meme of a kind when they ask the
question what's your definition of
knowledge what's your definition of
energy or liberty
what they want aside from trapping you
in a debate over terms perhaps which is
again
not real philosophy is that they might
genuinely want to learn but they want to
learn the definition it's like they're
back at school and they want to write
their list of words in a glossary and
once they learn them off by heart with
their definitions they can top of the
test and say they understand all those
words and therefore they understand this
thing and what they're talking about
because they've got the vocabulary and
they know what these definitions are and
i think that's just a wrong way of going
about understanding reality and
understanding philosophy and
understanding science as well but it's
the traditional conception that people
have about how learning kind of works i
know this is the way i was taught here
write a glossary of terms here write
these definitions of words and it's
still done today teachers love a good
glossary at the back of students
workbooks now is this to say definitions
are utterly pointless well no of course
not but you have dictionaries for that
kind of thing the better idea especially
when it comes to subtle and open-ended
concepts to some extent especially in
philosophy and science is to approach
the term from various different angles
and try to come to a more complete
panoramic understanding of the term
realizing the whole time there is no
single definition for some of these
things but rather we have an explanation
of what this concept is and we can
likely improve it over time as well so
don't learn the definition just try to
understand what this thing is all about
now why am i rattling on about that why
would i be saying that approach to
learning is wrong well
in this field in thermodynamics it's
filled with this kind of subtlety and
the use of very common words that
everyone thinks they know
but
in thermodynamics these words have a
certain kind of precision precision use
one might say idiosyncratic use but
sometimes that precise and idiosyncratic
use can can seem to make things more
difficult to pass and so for that reason
i'm going to be doing something else
today in this particularly extended
podcast today rather than me just
telling you well here's what energy is
for example and here's what degraded
energy is here's the first law and
here's the second law listing things
here's the definition of let's say
entropy which is something we'll get to
and then
presuming at the end once you've
understood all those words you're going
to understand thermodynamics no we don't
want to do that
we're going to talk about the words talk
about some of the definitions but i want
to take a wide variety of approaches to
these things
from popular science and from the
history of science and from
mainstream texts as well and see if and
where they converge and hopefully this
will help us create some sort of
background knowledge so then we can
understand what chiara and david are
accomplishing with the constructor
theoretic view when it comes in
particular to the second law which as i
say
is kind of the goal of the exercise here
i'm going to meander through this
territory today to try to come to
thermodynamics and the main concepts and
the main laws there are as usually
countered four of those laws numbered
confusingly zero one two and three so
that perhaps if you are
largely unfamiliar with this stuff that
by the end of this episode you're in a
good position to really get the
punchline so to speak by the end of next
episode and perhaps if you didn't know
much about thermodynamics before and
perhaps you have a casual interest in it
you'll be more scientifically literate
in it let's say from now on perhaps so
i'm going to be referring to
a few old texts that i'm going to dust
off and my own notes as well from having
taught some of this stuff over many
years and i'm going to therefore lean on
some of the giants who write in this
area of thermodynamics and first and
foremost among them i've already
mentioned the man who is the perhaps one
of the greatest minds on this topic
professor peter atkins he wrote some of
the seminal and foundational texts on
the topic of thermodynamics and physical
chemistry
mainly for chemists and physicists and
engineers and others who needed some
sort of grounding in this stuff he's the
kind of the go-to guy when it comes to
thermodynamics but more than that he
backed up all that heavy technical stuff
with some with some really really good
popular science books explaining the
implications of these things the the
sort of broader deeper philosophical
implications of some of this stuff he's
got numerous lectures by the way online
and again those online span the highly
technical through to the popular and
philosophical so up front i want to say
that today much of what i am saying
comes straight from atkins but of course
errors are my own entirely i just don't
want to have to stop all the time and
quote him when i'm saying stuff because
many of his words that he's written down
will just come flying out of my mouth
because i'll be aping what he says when
it comes to thermodynamics most of my
own lessons that i ever delivered on
thermodynamics were basically me
imitating peter atkins as he appeared in
print like that heat quote earlier which
i really love and can almost recite off
by heart it comes flying out of my mouth
whenever the topic of heat comes up and
the other guy i'm going to be referring
to and i'm going to read snippets from
his work today is paul davies paul
davies is of course not only an
accomplished physicist but you know a
polymath of a kind in his own right and
one of the most prolific popular science
authors ever and really my first
introduction to the idea that the second
law had anything like deep implications
or philosophical implications came from
professor davies and in particular the
mind of god where i read well let me
just read that bit for you
from the mind of god
to give you a taste of why i was
inspired by it and realized that this
thermodynamic stuff is up there
alongside quantum theory and general
relativity as being the stuff that you
want to understand better if you want to
understand the deepest theories about
the universe so i've taken the mind of
god here and i'm reading a little bit of
page 46 over to 47 and paul davies wrote
quote
today we recognize that no star could
keep burning forever it would run out of
fuel
this serves to illustrate a very general
principle an eternal universe is
incompatible with the continuing
existence of irreversible physical
processes
if physical systems can undergo
irreversible change at a finite rate
then they will have completed those
changes an infinite time ago
consequently we would not be witnessing
such changes such as the production and
omission of starlight now in fact the
physical universe abounds with
irreversible processes in some aspects
it is rather like a clock slowly running
down just as a clock cannot keep running
forever so the universe cannot have been
running forever without being rewound
these problems began to force themselves
on scientists during the mid 19th
century until then physicists had dealt
with laws that are symmetric in time
displaying no favoritism between past
and future then the investigation of
thermodynamic processes change that for
good at the heart of thermodynamics lies
the second law which forbids heat to
flow spontaneously from cold to hot
bodies while allowing it to flow from
hot to cold pausing near my reflection
notice here even with the great paul
dabies who much respect love dearly as a
thinker he's got the idea of heat
flowing there from one place to another
a misconception i think a not the best
use of language it doesn't really get
across what's actually going on and it
will get to the reason why people still
talk in this way anyway let's keep going
quote this law is therefore not
reversible it imprints upon the universe
an arrow of time pointing the way of
unidirectional change scientists were
quick to draw the conclusion that the
universe is engaged in a one-way slide
towards a state of thermodynamic
equilibrium this tendency towards
uniformity wherein temperatures even out
and the universe settles into a stable
state became known as the heat death it
represents a state of maximum molecular
disorder or entropy
the fact that the universe has not yet
so died that is it is still in a state
of less than maximum entropy implies it
cannot have endured for all eternity end
quote from paul davies so that's some
amazing stuff there i think
an irreversible law that tells us the
universe cannot have endured forever so
forget the big bang in expanding
space-time and hubble redshifts and so
on all you need to know that the
universe actually had a beginning in
time is that there is such a thing
as entropy but what is entropy exactly
well as he says there it's disorder okay
but what's that is it like mass we can
measure the quantity of matter and we
can measure well that's called mass the
quantity of matter and we can measure
the force of gravity or the effect of
gravity on something that's called the
white and we can measure
volumes and we can measure lengths with
rulers but entropy how to quantify that
so i'll come back to paul davies that
was the first of his books that i ever
read and i recently bought his
most recent book
what's eating the universe and other
cosmic questions here and it too has a
chapter all about times arrow the second
law so i'll come back to that
and don't you love the
the title what's eating the universe
which really is bringing the concept of
online click bait into the world of
popular science publishing but that
aside it is actually a great book the
chapters are very short almost little
blog posts again another sign of our
times perhaps but chapter 16 of the book
is titled what is the source for time's
puzzling error so i'll make some remarks
about that chapter and there's a
third book here that i want to mention
there's many books i'm going to be
referring to but not all of them will
get a name check but i have to name
check this one
it's called a
cultural history of physics by carol
simone and it's a it's an absolutely
beautiful book i've got the hardcover
version very hard to find now though in
um hardback form anywhere i've been
looking for other copies of very very
difficult to find but if you can get a
hold of it it's if you have someone in
your life who absolutely loves physics
then this is the gift for them it's
obviously a history of physics but it's
got all sorts of little gems in there
like little biographies of the
physicists and
nice clear images of original text and
diagrams taken from you know the the
original work of like newton newton's
principia or descartes own notes or all
the sections on quantum theory have
ju quotes from dueling physicists trying
to understand what the heck was going on
exactly pages from einstein's first
article on relativity and so on and yeah
i understand all of this stuff can be
found online these days but having it in
one place in chronological order as well
as a history of physics that's really
nice as i say you could find it online
but here someone else has done all of
the hard work for you and the author
unpacks what it all means from the
perspective of the time what they were
understanding the philosophical problems
they were having at the time and from
our perspective now given what we know
but what they couldn't have so actually
i'm going to go to that book right now
and read from a section which indicates
the kind of subtleties of language in
this area of thermodynamics that i've
mentioned already and how there has been
this resistance at times in the history
of science and in physics in particular
to take seriously
the best prevailing theory at any given
time so something like heat
as i've already spoken about well simoni
he writes himself the author of the text
writes one would expect that ideas
concerning the nature of heat would have
been based on a conception that was
already widespread at the end of the
17th century namely that heat has its
origin in the motion of the particles
that make up the material body
this would have led directly to the
connection between the two forms of
energy heat and kinetic energy however
that is not what happened in a seemingly
superfluous and at first glance
surprising detour in the history of
physics the kinetic theory of heat was
abandoned and in its place a theory of
heat substance caloricum was adopted it
is only the result of our hasty judgment
about what should have happened that
names such as joseph black have fallen
into obscurity although we owe our
thanks to him for such quantitative
concepts as heat quantity specific heat
latent heat melting point and boiling
point it has also been forgotten that
findings in carnos and fourier's theory
of heat that are seen today as
fundamental and used in teaching are
based on the theory of caloricum
based on this theory of heat being a
substance and that is why there is this
misconception in our language that we
inherit today i should have said end
quote there but you get the picture and
in that bit that i just read there you
might have noticed a quibble as well
simiani is praising black for the
concept of hate quantity but he quantity
itself is also
one of those very misconceptions someone
like atkins is trying to help us
understand isn't a thing so let's just
move past that that can be a little
speed pump and sommony brings up joseph
black a name who's fallen as he says
into obscurity because actually he did
as much as anyone and should be credited
with some of the first formulations of
the laws of thermodynamics joseph black
was scottish and he lived from 1728 to
1799. he was a professor of chemistry
and medical science and black taught
james watt among others and he
introduced the concept of specific heat
as was mentioned just there now what
specific heat exactly
well feynman explained it as being like
the absorbency of a cloth some cloths
like you know tissues can hold very
little water before becoming saturated
while others like a sponge can hold much
more water specific heat or let me talk
about specific heat capacity it's the
quantity of energy that a substance can
hold or more precisely the quantity of
energy taken to raise the temperature of
a substance
or if we want to be exact with this it
is the quantity of energy usually in
joules these days required to heat a
unit mass
usually in kilograms by one kelvin which
is equivalent to one degree celsius
basically if i have a one kilogram lump
of metal like a lump of iron and i put
it over a flame for one minute its
temperature will rise
quite a lot it has
low specific heat capacity it doesn't
take much energy to raise its
temperature as compared to if i was to
take one kilogram of water which is a
liter of water and use the same flame to
heat it presumably it's in a saucepan of
some kind or a pot in one minute you
don't get anywhere near the same
temperature rise as what you do with the
iron there is an inherent property
therefore inherent property of
substances that determines how much
their temperature rises given some
change in their internal energy now
what's internal energy
well we'll come back to that another
concept that joseph black was first to
figure out was
latent heat and it's a similar idea if
you have one kilogram of water and it's
boiling at 100 degrees celsius then
there's a certain quantity of energy it
takes to boil away all of that water in
other words to change one kilogram of
water in its liquid form at 100 degrees
celsius into its gaseous form at 100
degrees celsius that's what latent
heat's all about now for other
substances if you've got one kilogram of
it let's say one kilogram of pure
alcohol and it's boiling the amount of
energy it takes to change its state from
liquid to gas is less that's what latent
heat is and there's latent heat for
solid stuff turning into liquid stuff
and latent heat of liquid stuff turning
into gaseous stuff as well or in some
cases solid straight into gases in the
case of carbon dioxide let's say so
this idea of specific heat and latent
heat it can be a little bit confusing
because right there if you're joseph
black and you have some sound concepts
like that latent heat and specific heat
easily tested and measured in the
chemistry lab it looks for all the world
like latent heat and specific heats are
kinds of heat and thus heat is something
that is itself a
thing of a kind a substance of a kind so
there's a quantity of it in stuff so to
speak and when you increase the
temperature of something the heat goes
up and decrease the temperature and the
heat goes down and surely it's common
sense that if you heat something
strongly enough like a metal rod that i
was talking about earlier you heat one
end and eventually the other end gets
hot too why well the common sense theory
goes that the heat is flowing conducted
so we say along the metal now as i
explained before that contains
misconception it's not like it's utterly
wrong i don't like to say anything like
that is utterly wrong it contains some
truth but it also contains important
misconceptions but to explain more fully
those important misconceptions with that
whole view of heat let's do a pass of
the
four laws as well let's say i would
normally explain them if i had to teach
this stuff and this will allow us to
understand the misconceptions in this
idea of heat flowing from here to there
from hot bodies to cold bodies and
bodies having heat in them and so on and
so forth and by going through
these laws of thermodynamics we'll be
able to then before the end of today's
lengthy episode come back and linger on
the deeper implications of the second
law in particular this will set us up
well i hope for what constructor theory
has to offer that's new and we'll be
able to introduce kiara's chapter on
heat and work so let's begin with the
zeroth law and the zeroth law basically
forces upon us the concept of
temperature why is it the zeroth law and
not the first law well just because of
history the first law was found first
and later it was understood that prior
to understanding parts of the first and
second law we needed a law governing
what temperature was what temperature
did so
temperature is this interesting concept
in and of itself so they introduced the
zeroth law later on
temperature is degree of hotness or
coldness and that's fine you can say
that but it's qualitative now you could
say that temperature is the thing that a
thermometer measures and that's also
true but we want to know what it's
measuring precisely what is it that's
going on causing the thermometer to
indicate one temperature rather than
another is it
quantity of heat well we've already said
that's not a thing but even if you
imagined it is you might imagine
something like the red hot nail compared
to a bath full of boiling water now the
red hot nail might be a thousand degrees
celsius the bath of boiling water is
cooler by a factor of 10 but if a
torturer gave you the choice of holding
either the nail or plunging into the
bath there really is no choice choose
the nail
sure you'll burn your hand
but you won't be dead the bath contains
far
more
energy even though it's at a much lower
temperature so temperature has something
to do with intensity
rather than quantity
intensity of what though yes i know i've
already told you but we're going to make
this more precise if you consider the
air in a room at 30 degrees celsius then
most of that air is made up of nitrogen
nitrogen exists as
n2 molecules two nitrogen atoms joined
together and at 30 degrees celsius a
nitrogen molecule has an average speed
of about
500 meters per second they're zipping
around all over the place now if you
increase the temperature of the room the
average speed of the molecules will also
increase
maybe that's it
the temperature is a measure of the
average speed of the particles well
that's all very well except that if the
nitrogen is at 30 degrees and that
corresponds to 500 meters per second
what about the chair in the same room as
the air
the chair is made of wood or metal or
plastic and its particles are not
zipping around at 500 meters per second
they're just vibrating in place so this
is a bit of a problem because although
it is true that increasing the
temperature of a body increases the
speed of the motion of the particles
particles have different masses and
they're bonded to each other more or
less strongly so it can't be a
one-to-one thing of that a particular
temperature corresponds to a particular
particle speed in general so we need a
somewhat more
precise conceptual understanding of
temperature we might have more luck if
we weren't just talking about speed but
we're talking about kinetic energy of
the particles
because kinetic energy takes into
account the mass of the particles as
well but still can we have something
straightforward that everyone can agree
on and then move forward so here's one
basic idea if i've got two bodies a and
b that are in contact and isolated from
the environment then if a is hotter than
b energy moves from a
to b until a is no longer hotter than b
nor b
hotter than a
they have become
equal in some way what is it exactly
that has become equal between them well
the temperature has
more precisely we say that a and b have
the same temperature when they are in
thermal equilibrium
one statement of the zeroth law of
thermodynamics is
if a is in thermal equilibrium with b
and b is in thermal equilibrium with c
then c and a will be in thermal
equilibrium
so it's a law of thermal transitivity
effectively the zeroth law implies the
existence of a thermometer it's the
device in thermal equilibrium with its
surroundings so none of that statement
of the law even implies the existence of
particles you will notice as atkins
famously says you can do classical
thermodynamics even if you don't believe
in atoms in the quote but of course we
do know about atoms now so as a result
we have this thing called statistical
thermodynamics which is an account of
what is happening according to the laws
of thermodynamics in terms of particles
or atoms
it's statistical because we are less
concerned about what individual
particles are doing and more about
aggregates or averages that give rise to
the bulk properties that we do observe
it was ludwig boltzmann in the 1800s
actually who provided a view of
temperature that is connected to
particles and i've already hinted at it
the thing about boltzmann's view from
statistical thermodynamics is that it
provides some insight into quantum
theory which came a little later if
we've got a glass of water at room
temperature
then we know that left long enough the
water evaporates away how is this
possible doesn't water only change state
from liquid to gas when it boils how can
we explain evaporation that happens at
any temperature have you ever wondered
that yourself
why is it that you know if water changes
for if you ask what temperature does the
water change from liquid into gas people
will say well at the boiling point at
100 degrees celsius if you're not an
american using fahrenheit let's say but
then how does evaporation work why
should it be the case that at any
temperature less than the boiling point
at the temperature at which
the liquid turns into a gas that you
still get a liquid turning into a gas
what the heck is going on well
water can change in its liquid form into
a gaseous form at any temperature
because the temperature of the water in
terms of the particles has something to
do with the distribution of energies of
those particles and those particles have
a range of energies not any energy that
you like that's quantum theory there
they must have specific energies but
they can have a range of energies
some at any given temperature
most of them will have a certain kind of
energy or be grouped up into a
particular kind of energy but but some
of them will have much less energy than
the average and some will have much more
energy than the average so maybe you can
see where i'm going with this in any
average typical glass of water at room
temperature there will be some small
number of water molecules in your glass
of water that have the lowest possible
energy they could have and that
corresponds to energy at or very close
to what would be regarded as zero kelvin
so some
molecules of water in a glass of water
at room temperature can't vibrate any
slower than not at all and some will be
vibrating basically not at all they
won't be moving hardly at all they'll
have almost zero kinetic energy
therefore their temperature corresponds
to something like zero kelvin minus 273
degrees celsius not many of them not
many of them of course but some
most of them will have energies that
correspond to the room temperature but
if you don't accept that well you have
to accept that well some of the water
molecules in any given room temperature
glass
are
literally boiling away they're
evaporating they have the energy
required to change the state of the
water from liquid into gas
there is some such energy needed to do
that as the temperature of the water
rises a greater and greater proportion
of the molecules of the water molecules
begin to occupy those higher energy
states hence more of them are turning
into gas achieving escape velocity from
the rest of the liquid that's what
that's why evaporation tends to increase
as the water increases in temperature
now the energy of particles like
molecules of water comes actually in
three kinds it comes in
what i've already mentioned vibrational
which is all that solid particles can do
they're just fixed in place and they're
vibrating because the bonds that hold
them together aren't going anywhere but
then there's also rotational and
rotational energy is the kind of energy
that you that your particles get once
they've entered the liquid phase so the
bonds break and now they're able to
rotate around one another still in
contact still weakly bonded to one
another but in physical contact with one
another they're still vibrating but now
they're actually also able to rotate and
that's in the liquid phase they can
slide around each other once those
solid bonds are broken and then finally
if you add a little more energy you get
translational energy as well so the
particles are still vibrating they're
still rotating but now they can move
from one place to another and then we
have the gaseous state that's what
happens to move from
solids where the particles are vibrating
fixed in position the liquid where
they're vibrating but now they're also
able to rotate because the bonds have
broken and then once all the bonds are
effectively broken broken the
intermolecular bonds that exist in
liquids like water once they're broken
as well although you have vibration and
rotation you now have translations so
they're the three modes of kinetic
energy that you can have now you can you
can quantify this you can quantify this
using something called the boltzmann
distribution that puts a precise number
the parameter beta on how the energy of
the molecules at some temperature are
distributed
i won't go into that suffice it to say
there is a simple equation beta equals 1
over kt
where t is the temperature in kelvin
kelvin temperature and k is the
boltzmann constant the higher the t the
smaller the beta and vice versa
temperature is thus a measure of the
distribution of energies of particles in
some substance at equilibrium so that's
what t is that's what temperature is the
zeroth law
has forced upon us has explained the
concept of temperature for us either
classically as that quantity which is
equal when two bodies are in thermal
equilibrium or in terms of particles as
that quantity which indicates the
distribution of the energies of the
particles in that body so that's the
zeroth law well what's the first law
then well the first law is energy
conservation the idea here
is that however much energy there is at
the beginning of the universe that's how
much you have at every other time at any
other time in fact pick your year or
moment after the big bang and you've got
the same amount of energy in the
universe then as what you had at the big
bang but there's a little more to it
than that
the zeroth law introduced temperature
and refined its meaning for us the first
law is really about trying to get it
what we mean by energy especially
internal energy but let's begin with
energy in general let's define something
in physics i said i didn't like to get
fixed on definitions but here's one that
we can use that's very useful and that
people don't have quibbles with a force
applied over some distance is work work
equals force times the distance the work
has to be done in the same direction as
the force that makes it makes common
sense you try to move your fridge it
takes some force to overcome the
friction on the ground someone asks you
to move the fridge five meters that's
one thing that's a certain amount of
work for you to do a certain amount of
effort but to move it 50 meters that's
something else entirely lots more work
literally so work really is motion
against some force and in fact lifting
is the best way of envisioning this you
lift a weight vertically against gravity
and you've done work we're speaking in
newtonian terms here of course so a
capacity to do work is important you can
lift a one kilogram mass with your hand
but presumably so could an electric
motor attach to a pulley so the motor
can do work and maybe that motor is
powered by an electric battery so the
battery has capacity to do work as well
or maybe some coal can be burned that
drives a turbine that lifts the mass the
coal has capacity to do work so this
capacity to do work
that's energy or is it we might come
back to that maybe there are some kinds
of energy that can't do work anyway as a
first pass
that's the idea capacity to do work is
energy and work is the capacity to exert
some force over some distance
energy these concepts have something to
do with the common sense notions that we
have of these things work and energy but
they're sharpened up by physics now
there's this standard high school
physics experiment it's due to jewel who
first performed the experiment where
basically a falling weight over a pulley
drives some paddles that stir some water
in a perfectly well insulated well as
well insulated as you can manage
a container of water and the water's
temperature it goes up you can measure
it because the work done goes straight
into the water and from there well it's
in the water it can only cause the
temperature to rise
what's any of this prove well it shows
that work the falling over weight can be
used to heat water you can convert work
into heat and vice versa of course as my
little sterling engine showed but with
this this experiment this is joules
experiment in the high school lab you
can make some precise measurements and
show that using an actual heater to heat
the water requires the same energy you
can use equations like energy equals
power times time or equivalently energy
equals voltage times the current times
the time and they can be used to
calculate the work done by a heater of
known voltage and current running for
some time to heat some water now who
cares about any of that well that
introduces this idea of path
independence it does not matter how the
temperature changes come about whether
by heat or by work the effect is the
same
but although earlier we were talking
about kinetic energy of particles and so
on here in this case of rising
temperature we can talk about the
specific number of joules of energy
imparted to the water but we don't
measure temperature using joules so what
happens to these joules of energy
imparted by the heater or by the paddle
what have they gone into well they've
gone into the water but again not as a
separate fluid of some kind after all
the paddles weren't doing anything but
agitating the water
we say they have gone into a quantity we
call the internal energy and we use the
symbol u
for
the internal energy so the internal
energy of the system of the water when
the temperature rises in a system like a
cup of water or whatever we say that u
has increased so something has increased
here yes the temperature has but also
the number of joules have increased
where in the internal energy of the
water now what the internal energy is
exactly we don't need to worry ourselves
about exactly if we're doing classical
thermodynamics we just know that it's
gone up or gone down because then we can
calculate the change by making
measurements but if you want to know now
and i'm going to come back to this the
internal energy is the sum of all the
kinetic and potential energies of the
particles that make up the substance and
perhaps even also the mass energy but
calculating the total internal energy of
any given substance well no one ever
bothers with that we're only ever
interested in the
change in internal energy that's the
most relevant thing for when you're
building engines and so forth now if we
imagine joules experiment where the
paddles spin the temperature rises
there's no heater there it's just
mechanical motion the thing is if we
take away the insulation then
more energy is required in order to
achieve the same rise in temperature but
why should that be where is the energy
going
i know we know it's common sense it's
going into the surroundings because the
thing's not insulated anymore but what
this shows
profoundly is that energy therefore is
of
two types you do
work on something that's well isolated
and the temperature rises because you've
increased the internal energy of the
system in the water but if you remove
the insulation then you must do more
work because the energy has gone
somewhere where well there has been a
transfer of energy to the environment
and not by work
hence we need this other word hence we
have this concept of heat the reason the
energy has been lost to the environment
is because there is a temperature
difference between the water now which
is warmer and the rest of the
environment around it which is cooler as
atkins says
this transfer of energy as a result of a
temperature difference is called
heat so that's what heat is again
heat is the transfer of energy as the
result of a temperature difference as i
quoted him earlier it is not the name of
a thing but rather the name of a process
we can measure the energy transferred as
heat therefore
simply by determining the work done on
the system when well insulated and then
measuring the difference between that
case and when the insulation is removed
the difference is the energy transferred
as heat usually to the environment now
there is no such thing as perfect
insulation of course so if work is done
on a system and that changes its
temperature its internal energy then the
work done is never exactly equal to the
change in internal energy why because
some heat is lost to the environment and
that's what we're going to come back to
so
energy is transferred to substances
either by work or by heating in the case
of work what is going on is that there
has been at the level of some particles
some uniform motion of the atoms in the
case of joules apparatus the molecules
are all pushed in the same direction by
the paddles that's what work is work is
force over a given distance
in the direction of the force so all the
particles end up moving in the same way
but when a substance is heated that's
not uniform motion of the particles
rather there is an increase in the
random motion of the particles their
kinetic energy
either of translation and vibrational
rotation increases that's what heating
is so there we have the differences why
both of these things can cause a
temperature rise but one is an average
bulk motion all in the same direction
that's work or randomly sort of causing
all of the particles to speed up in
their motion both it's motion of
particles it's just that one is work and
one is heat but if
if mind you i double f if and only if
there was a perfectly insulated
container of water and you did work on
the container of water then the amount
of work done would be transferred to the
water entirely and b represented as a
temperature increase the first law says
that the work done w must be equal
precisely to the increase in internal
energy u of the system in that case so w
would equal delta u
work equals the change in internal
energy and that's the first law for a
perfectly isolated system of course if
it's not perfectly isolated then w
equals delta u plus q where q is the
energy transferred as a consequence of
heating
so that is the first law that the work
done is equal to the change in internal
energy but plus
heat the the heat loss to the
environment let's say
now normally text and so on actually
write that first law as delta u equals q
minus w to emphasize i think we can
measure only changes in u not any
absolute amount of u u is the internal
energy so it's the sum of all the
kinetic energies the motion and the
potential the bond energies of the
particles and as i say presumably it can
also include things like the mass energy
as well if you like so that's the first
law which means we're at the second law
at this point i'm just going to hand
things over wholesale to peter atkins
and his book called
four laws that drive the universe and
the beginning of his chapter on the
second law now here i'm going to be
reading from page 49 where atkins writes
quote when i gave lectures on
thermodynamics to an undergraduate
chemistry audience i often began by
saying that no other scientific law has
contributed more to the liberation of
the human spirit than the second law of
thermodynamics i hope that you will see
in the course of this chapter why i take
that view and perhaps go so far as to
agree with me the second law has a
reputation for being recondite
notoriously difficult and a litmus test
of scientific literacy indeed the
novelist and former chemist c p snow is
famous for having asserted in his the
two cultures
that not knowing the second law of
thermodynamics is equivalent to never
having read a work by shakespeare i
actually have serious doubts about
whether snow understood the law himself
but i concur with his sentiments the
second law is of central importance in
the whole of science and hence in our
rational understanding of the universe
because it provides a foundation for
understanding why any change occurs
thus not only is it a basis for
understanding why engines run and
chemical reactions occur but it is also
a foundation for understanding those
most exquisite consequences of chemical
reactions the acts of literary artistic
and musical creativity that enhance our
culture and quote from atkins so that's
pretty amazing stuff and it really is
why people like paul davies and other
popularisers make such a big deal about
the second law what atkins says there
puts the second law of thermodynamics
into a sort of different category to
others it is elevated to this place
where it is invoked alongside not only
physics and chemistry and engineering
but also art so let's get a little
technical on this and go back to atkins
who writes quote as we have seen for the
zeroth and first laws the formulation
and interpretation of a law of
thermodynamics leads us to introduce a
thermodynamic property of the system the
temperature t
springs from the zeroth law and the
internal energy u from the first law
likewise the second law implies the
existence of another thermodynamic
property the entropy
symbol s
to fix our ideas in the concrete at an
early stage it will be helpful
throughout this account to bear in mind
that whereas u is a measure of the
quantity of energy that a system
possesses
s is a measure of the quality of that
energy
low entropy means high quality high
entropy means low quality end quote but
what does quality mean
here's the way i used to think about
this and i can't remember where i heard
it first but i know brian cox used it in
one of his documentaries presumably we
both got it from the same common source
anyways the metaphor goes like this with
a little bit of local adaptation here in
australia we've got some very nice
beaches there is one on the south coast
i've been to many times it looks like
this it's called heims beach and it's
close to where my parents live it's
famous if you move in some circles
because it's said to have among the
whitest sand anywhere in the world just
look at it so if you go there on a
typical australian summer's day in early
january say and you go without shade and
without sunscreen you will get sunburned
the sun is intense in australia in
summer especially in places like holmes
beach sunburn is caused by ultraviolet
light uv light comes down from the sun
and it can burn you okay because
sunlight is bright
now throughout the course of the day
that sunlight that bright sunlight from
the sun comes down beaming all day long
heating the sand as well as the water
but let's concentrate on the sand it
heats it all day long for a good 10
hours or so ignoring the less bright
times of sunrise and sunsets so it's
unsurprising that at night once the sun
is gone the sand is still warm and it
will gradually cool over the course of
the night but anyone who goes to the
beach will know that beach sand is warm
even well after sunset what's going on
well the first law of thermodynamics of
course the heating of the sand during
the day by the sunlight causes a change
in the internal energy of the sand and
that is noticeable by a change in
temperature of the sand the heating
happens because there is a temperature
difference between the sun and the sand
the sunlight has a higher temperature
and heats the sand which is cooler and
it does all this by radiation very well
bright sunlight heats sand okay easy so
at night when the sun is gone and it
goes dark because the earth is facing
away from the sun the same first law
holds and the temperature difference
between the sand and the cool air and
the dark sky now means that the same
processes happen but in reverse the
energy gained from the sun is now lost
to the atmosphere which is then lost to
outer space the sand heats the air above
it and it gradually cools heat gained by
the sun during the day is lost by the
sand at night and this goes on day after
day year after year eon after eon and
just as well because if it was not the
case and there was not this equilibrium
this equality between energy in an
energy out if the energy gained by the
sand from heating by the sun during the
day was not or lost at night by an equal
amount each day then the sand would be
hotter the next day and the day after
that and the day after that it wouldn't
be long before the sand was so hot it
was glowing red hot but that doesn't
happen there is a relatively constant
temperature of the sand during the day
and during the night all the energy
gained on monday
is lost monday night only to be regained
again on tuesday and lost tuesday night
and so it goes with no net increase of
energy by the sand the quantity of
energy gained equals the quantity of
energy lost energy in equals energy out
all the energy is accounted for none is
lost from the universe or created from
nothing okay fine common sense that's
the quantity of energy well then here's
the question if the energy that comes
from the sun in the daytime is in the
form of uv light which can sunburn you
and a visible light would help which
helps you see as well as some other
things then why at night is it not
radiated back into outer space as uv
light and visible light in fact it's
only irradiated back to outer space
broadly speaking as infrared radiation
so what's happened to the uv and visible
light is that all being reflected
no it's not all being reflected the
infrared radiation from the sun is not
the only kind of radiation from the sun
that's absorbed by the sand the sand
like a human skin also absorbs uv light
and that's coming from the sun during
the day we know we absorb it we know
that skin absorbs uv radiation because
we can get sunburned but if that uv
radiation and the visible light is
absorbed by the sand why can't we get
sunburned at night as the uv light is
re-emitted back into outer space for
that matter why doesn't the sand glow
with visible light at night so as to
return all the visible light energy it
absorbed during the day well this is the
thing although the quantity of energy is
the same
absorbed during the day and emitted at
night the type of energy is not the
energy absorbed during the day is
degraded in this process
at night the high quality stuff the uv
and the visible light is all of it
degraded to a longer wavelength lower
frequency lower quality less useful kind
of energy at night as infrared radiation
that our eyes cannot see but our skin
can feel the overall quantity of energy
re-emitted at night is the same but the
quality has changed it's been reduced
and this quality of energy can be
quantified as a thing called entropy the
entropy has increased now i said there
in that account the energy from the sun
becomes less useful as it's readmitted
to outer space at night what does that
mean well here we can turn to some
history and sardi kano another great
name from thermodynamics
in from the early 1800s he looked at how
to make engines more efficient long
story short i'll just give you the
punchline to this bit of science the
efficiency of an engine that converts
heat into work in other words how much
of the heat will be converted into
useful work is given by this equation
the efficiency equals one minus the
temperature of the sink divided by the
temperature of the source so
you know here we had the sterling engine
going on earlier on and my cup is the
source of energy and the sink is the
rest of the environment here in my room
this is the formula for maximum
efficiency so today it's like 23 degrees
celsius in here and my cup is
98 degrees celsius there but that's all
in celsius we need to convert things to
kelvin to get this equation to work so
we've got the temperature of the sink or
the environment is 273 plus 23 that
converts it into 296 kelvin and the
temperature of the source well it's
about 98 degrees that water it's not
quite boiling but 273 plus 98 gives me
371 kelvin
now putting all this into our equation 1
minus 296 over 371 that works out to be
about 0.2 20 percent isn't that pitiful
now the way to improve this is to have
higher temperature of the source or
lower temperature of the sink ideally
let the sink temperature approach
absolute zero or ideally let the source
temperature approach infinity but how do
you do either of those things
real-life engines run on fuels that burn
at particular temperatures real-life
sinks are the environment of the earth
which have a fixed temperature as well
the sink the environment is why the
energy is lost as heat in these
situations and why that energy becomes
less useful we need the sink to push the
heat energy away so that the bits
continue to move around because we need
those temperatures to be as far apart as
we can get them in order for the thing
to move quickly to be efficient or
considered another way let's imagine a
power station here's a good diagram of a
coal-fired power station i say this
diagram is good because it emphasizes as
really important
this thing here this thing here is the
cooling tower whenever you see pictures
of power stations you see these things
and they usually have water vapor coming
out environmentalists use those pictures
to imply that's the pollution well if
you think water vapor is pollution well
that's your business
they should be showing the smokestacks
which are these things problem is that
the smokestacks almost never have any
visible smoke coming out because modern
power stations coal-fired power stations
they filter out the particles the only
thing that's coming out really is carbon
dioxide but anyways why not in a
situation like this if the power station
is doing its job converting heat to work
why waste the heat coming out here why
not capture it here well just like that
what about another turbine then that can
generate some more electricity why waste
that heat why let it escape off into the
atmosphere sure the hot steam can do
less work as it passes through the first
turbine but who cares let's capture it
anyway
well the problem is
that means the steam slows down here
slowed down by the second turbine so
things begin to pile up and it begins to
heat up everything begins to heat up so
for this turbine here the temperature
here and temperature here
quickly approach approximately the same
the efficiency reduces the only reason
this is spinning at all this first
turbine is that the steam is high
pressure here low pressure here because
the lower temperature here so it's
rushing to fill the low temperature void
but if you put another turbine there in
an attempt to capture that lost heat to
do work with it the only thing that
happens is
this turbine slows down and so whatever
you think you've gained here with the
second turbine you've lost from the
first you can't actually gain anything
as some people put it with the first law
they say
the first law is a statement of how you
cannot win in other words you cannot get
work done for nothing so sometimes
people say that the first law is you
can't win the second law is you can't
break even and the third law is you will
always lose
not precise not quantitative so anyways
here we have it that in systems for
converting heat to work the process
cannot be perfectly efficient and some
of your work is lost as heat so you have
some heat here and not all of it becomes
work by necessity it has to be lost
and that's an irreversible change
we cannot capture that heat out there
somehow and bring it back into our power
station doing so increases the
temperature and in the long run slows
down the whole thing grinding it to a
halt
if it was an isolated system the whole
power station what would happen
thermal equilibrium and that would mean
zero motion anywhere now just to drive
this point home a little further because
we did if you remember the parable of
the beach heims beach where i was
talking about how although ultraviolet
light and visible light are coming down
amongst other things onto the beach onto
the sand heating the sand throughout the
course of the day in the evening what is
re-emitted back into outer space is the
same quantity of energy but not the same
quality of energy the energy has been
degraded to longer wavelengths of light
and so ultraviolet light is not coming
from the beach during the night time
with the power station something similar
is going on what's happening here is
that the energy is degraded after it's
done some work so that this heat energy
here is of we say higher quality but the
heat that's coming out here is of lower
quality it has less capacity to do work
and remember right at the beginning of
all this i was talking about how
energy is that thing which has the
capacity to do work that's what we said
a definition of energy could be
however in this case we have energy that
is not quite so capable of doing work as
i said after all
one thing that the naive person might
think is that we could put another
turbine right there in order to
capture the heat energy coming from the
first turbine and not waste it after all
it's just being let off into the
atmosphere there but as i said that's
merely going to cause the temperature
here
and the temperature here to eventually
equalize and if those temperatures are
equal then this thing is going to stop
spinning there's no reason for it to
keep going because
there's no reason for a pressure
differential anymore between this point
and that point if the gas in both places
is at the same temperature and so
therefore we say that the energy has
been degraded there has been an increase
in entropy the the energy is able to do
less
work and in the limit the heat energy
lost into out of space is actually
energy unable to do work perhaps even in
principle it is unable to do work and so
then we say well
what does it mean to say that all energy
is this thing that has the capacity to
do work when some of it does not have
the capacity to do work well it's an
interesting scientific philosophical
question that we can get into if we
originally defined energy as being that
thing that could do work in principle
but some of it after being degraded
by the second law is ultimately unable
to do work even in principle then what
is it well it's still energy of a kind
but it's degraded and unable to do work
and therefore violates what originally
what we originally said energy was this
formula of karnas for efficiency
it's worth reading what atkins actually
says about it in his book one of his
books
and he wrote atkins wrote quote carno's
analysis established a very deep
property of heat engines but its
conclusion was so alien to the
engineering prejudices of the time that
it had little impact
such as often the fate of rational
thought within society sent as it may be
to purgatory for a spell
end quote that's worth keeping in mind
when we think of david and kiara's work
on all this anyways this problem of the
power station can be summed up in what
is known as the kelvin statement of the
second law of thermodynamics which is
no cyclic process is possible in which
heat is taken from a hot source and
converted completely into work
notice that
something is said
not to be possible which is a
counterfactual claim the science of
canon can't so i'll read it again
no cyclic or cyclic process is possible
in which heat is taken from a hot source
and converted completely into work now i
really have to go back to
atkins here and just read what he says
about this and about
cold sinks
quote there must be a cold sink even
though we might find it hard to identify
and it is not always an engineered part
of the design the cooling towers of a
generating station are in this sense far
more important to its operation than the
complex turbines or the expensive
nuclear reactor that seems to drive them
end quote
yes so
the the the heat sink
is a crucially important part of these
thermodynamic systems so that you can
have this transfer of energy from the
hot to the cold which is the thing that
does the work there's another way of
putting the second law and it's it's
kind of inconvenient that there are this
variety of ways of putting things
qualitatively speaking but
quantitatively it turns out they can be
shown to be equivalent the other way of
putting
the second law is known as the classiest
statement of the second law which goes
like this the change in entropy equals
the heat supplied reversibly divided by
the temperature basically entropy is
disorder a gas has got high entropy a
solid being all ordered and crystal-like
has low entropy all the particles are
there lined up like soldiers standing at
attention a change in entropy is a ratio
of energy in joules of heat transferred
to the temperature in kelvin so the
units of entropy are joules per kelvin
and so yet another way of putting the
second law is that the entropy of the
universe increases in the course of any
spontaneous change
and and this is what you know paul
davies makes um a big deal about and
what you know many physicists make a big
deal about that you've got this uh
irrevocable um increase in the entropy
of the universe in other words the
system and the surroundings is what we
mean by the universe so whatever change
is going on and the rest of the universe
so that's the universe so
this leads to some misconceptions
the system all the surroundings can have
a decrease a local decrease in entropy
for example biology is a a highly
ordered
thing right your biological systems are
highly ordered and so this leads to
these misconceptions where
people try to i don't think they do it
so much anymore but um
creationists intelligent designers used
to say things like well we've got this
law of thermodynamics that says that
entropy must always increase
but biology is a thing that violates
that after all biology is a decrease in
entropy therefore
miracle no of course not okay you you
can have a local decrease in entropy
that's what a fridge does by the way it
it cools things and you have a decrease
in entropy inside the fridge but it is
expelling entropy and increase of
entropy to the rest of the universe same
two with biology the sun is shining on
the earth and heating the earth and
causing all sorts of um increases in
entropy everywhere else even if um
locally with the
knowledge being created inside of
organisms
you have a decrease in entropy there in
the organism but the organism is causing
increase of entropy in the rest of the
universe we can go right down that
rabbit hole with entropy it's all very
interesting and subtle and and so forth
but this is already a super long episode
so i might leave the technical
discussion of disorder exactly but but
it's probably worth going over it is
worth going over um at least
a more precise definition of entropy or
understanding of entropy as i like to
say rather than definition in terms of
what's happening with the particles so
let's consider particles at a fixed
temperature and remember what a a
particular temperature means it means
that the particles have a distribution
of energies and that distribution is
called the boltzmann distribution of the
energy of the particles over the allowed
energy levels at a given temperature
now here's the thing about energy levels
for a given volume of space
they're different to other volumes of
space
there are fewer permitted states or
energies that some collection of
particles can have in a smaller volume
you can imagine a microscopic box like
this one and in that microscopic box
only certain energies are allowed
according to the laws of quantum physics
that's just the way it is don't get
upset the universe is discrete in that
way you can't just have any energy that
you like you can have this energy or
that energy or that energy but not just
any energy in between these so let's say
we have this tiny tiny box
let's say this is to scale and these are
my particles in this box at some
temperature and let's say that's a
hundred kelvin tiny little box there and
there's your your particles and
they're the energies that they have this
is the ground state so to speak and the
minimum energy all the way up to this is
the particle with the the highest energy
and there are what
one two three four five six energy
levels here permitted inside of that box
at that particular temperature now the
thing is
that volume of space accommodates those
certain energy levels they are the
energy levels permitted by particles in
that volume but what if we increase the
volume of the box by widening it keeping
the temperature the same well this is
what happens to the energy levels you
see they then become closer together so
now instead of only having six energy
levels we have one two three four five
six seven eight nine ten we can have
more and so the particles distribute
themselves across more energy levels the
energy levels get closer together more
are permitted in this box okay that's
because the box is larger so the
boltzmann distribution
spans more energy levels at the same
temperature so we have a different
entropy
more disordered simply by virtue of the
fact there are more energy levels
permitted in a larger region of space or
another way of putting this is to say if
we were to randomly select a particle
from the first box with the aim of
getting it from the first level the
chance of getting a random particle from
that first level in the second box is
lower in comparison because there are
fewer there as atkins puts it quote the
disorder and the entropy increase as gas
occupies a greater volume at the same
temperature end quote which is right for
people too consider everyone squashed
into a classroom that's all quite
ordered now you let them out into the
playground disordered
just the completion of the the technical
stuff
the the formula normally taught
before entropy is this one which is the
entropy s is equal to k log w
now here k is the boltzmann constant
just as before
uh and it appears in our definition of
temperature as well s is the entropy but
here w is not the work
but it's the weight of arrangement of
particles the ways the particles can be
arranged to achieve some amount of
energy but anyways that's the formula
for total entropy now all of that is
second law and we're going to talk about
that again in the next episode and a
little bit more before the end of this
episode but we really have to go on and
just mention without going into too much
detail the third law of thermodynamics
and the third law of thermodynamics and
it states that the entropy of a system
approaches a constant value
as the temperature of the system
approaches absolute zero so different
substances different systems will have
different minimum entropies but that
greatest amount of order
will be achieved at absolute zero so
you'll end up having a constant value at
the minimum possible temperature but i'm
not going to get hooked on the third law
of thermodynamics so before i finish up
today and well done for persevering i
have to go as i promised to
paul davey's latest book
in the chapter all about times puzzling
arrow davies writes in his latest book
quote
i'm not reading the entire chapter just
a part of it quote
boiled down to its essentials the issue
with time's arrow is this
imagine taking a movie of an everyday
incident and playing it in reverse to an
audience
everybody laughs because it looks so
preposterous
people walking backwards rivers flowing
uphill
sand castles washed into shape by
retreating waves but in physics a laugh
test isn't enough what exactly gives the
game away here's a clue
open a new pack of cards the
manufacturers arrange them in numerical
order by suit shuffle the cards the
sequence will now be jumbled if a
magician shuffled a pack of jumbled
cards and gave them to you in numerical
order you'd know you were being duped
while it's not impossible for jumbled
cards to be randomly shuffled into order
it's exceedingly improbable the arrow of
time here is clear random disruption
turns order into disorder scientists
zeroed in on this basic property in the
middle of the 19th century the austrian
physicist ludwig boltzmann considered
how gas molecules rush around randomly
banging into each other and spreading
heat energy around he analyzed this
natural shuffling mathematically and
identified something called entropy a
precisely defined quantity that measures
the degree of disorder in the gas then
he used newton's laws of mechanics plus
an averaging assumption to prove that
entropy would never go down the rise and
rise of entropy is one expression of the
so-called second law of thermodynamics
perhaps the most inclusive law in all of
physics because what's true of gases is
true of everything all systems have a
natural tendency to grow messier to
degenerate and decay just skipping a
little and i'm picking it up where he
writes understanding the cosmic
implications of all this the british
physicist lord kelvin delivered a
lecture in 1852 famous for what has to
be the most depressing prediction in the
history of science the entire universe
claimed kelvin is dying slowly choking
on its own entropy gradually inexorably
cosmos is turning into chaos and then
davies goes on to say if the relentless
march of disorder defines the arrow of
time then the universe must have been
more ordered in the past and indeed it
was as i have been at pains to point out
the universe that emerged from the big
bang was astonishingly bafflingly
extremely highly ordered had it been
exactly ordered the arrow of time would
have stalled because perfection persists
it would have been a case of blandness
forever gravity would have nothing to
get its teeth into but of course the
nascent universe wasn't 100 perfect
there were those ever slight wispy
spludges found by kobe i mean naught
point naught one percent variation in
temperature far below what the human
senses would register pausing as my
reflection kobe is the cosmic microwave
background explorer it is this satellite
here it is it looks like this
first credited with detecting these
so-called anisotropies
in the cosmic microwave background these
anisotropies are fluctuations in the
temperature
previously we thought that the cosmic
microwave background the heat left over
from the big bang was extremely uniform
2.7 kelvin that's just above absolute
zero but uniform in all directions so
exactly 2.7 kelvin everywhere that you
looked unless you take extremely precise
measurements with a
microwave detecting satellite far above
the atmosphere of the earth and so the
first images that came back looked kind
of like this now this is an anisotropy
it's a dipole in fact
here it's slightly warmer here it's
slightly cooler now the reason for this
it's an artifact it's an artifact of the
fact that we are moving through the
galaxy in fact the galaxy is moving
through space and so so that can be
subtracted from the image and you end up
with something like this and that red
band through the middle there well that
should look familiar that's the milky
way and that can be subtracted out of
the image as well using image processing
and finally you end up with the image
that everyone was after which is this
the first image of the cosmic microwave
background
showing the slightly warmer and slightly
cooler regions the slightly cooler
regions are the slightly more dense
regions which eventually go on to
condense into the matter out of which
everything that we see in the universe
is made so all the galaxies end up
condensing out of these slightly more
dense regions and those warmer regions
are the voids in between where clusters
of galaxies and so on and so forth are
it was the first satellite that detected
evidence of the cosmic microwave
background radiation the heat left over
after the big bang
the person given the nobel prize for
physics for
finding this was george smooth his
student
was his graduate student who i think was
the first one to really analyze the the
the data
and then hand the data to smoot was
charlie lineweaver that famous physicist
i often talk about who also works uh
with has worked with paul davies
taught me as well he was one of my
lecturers so yes i heard a lot about
kobe during and those stories about um
kobe during lectures anyway continuing
splodges he's talking about splodges in
the images taken by kobe and davies goes
on to right quote the splodges betray a
minute departure from orderly perfection
a palette of almost imperceptible
density perturbations in the primordial
plasma gravity set to work on the
splodges the over-dense regions pulled
more strongly drawing in on the
surrounding material and amplifying the
density contrast generating large scale
complexity clusters of galaxies churning
clouds of gas and meandering stars
clumping is gravity's gift to cosmos and
i'm skipping a part here and i'll pick
it up where davies concludes with thus
it is that gravity the incubator and
annihilator of habitable order is also
the source of times pervasive arrow the
time asymmetry that distinguishes
yesterday from tomorrow memories from
anticipation birth from death can be
traced back to the birth of the universe
itself and specifically to its
extraordinary degree of primordial
smoothness
but where did that smoothness come from
in the first place do we just accept it
as unexplained initial condition a big
fix
one possible explanation is that an
appeal to the tiny violation of time
reversal symmetry in certain hard to
discern particle processes did the very
particles of the universe themselves
come with their own inbuilt arrow which
somehow projected itself onto the entire
cosmos in the torrid aftermath of the
big bang maybe but in my view not very
likely
far and away the most popular
explanation for the smooth start to the
universe is the inflationary scenario a
burst of anti-gravity propelled
expansion in the first split second
creates precisely that almost though not
quite perfect uniformity but that's
still not the end of the trial because
the universe has to get itself into an
inflationary state at the outset how did
that come about the scientific community
is still very far from reaching
consensus on these thorny issues all
that can be said for certain is that one
of the most fundamental properties of
the physical world that tomorrow is
different from today
still lacks a full explanation and it
lies high on my own list of essential
unanswered
big questions
so that's
davies now
the question is if so many other
approaches to trying to understand the
origins of this second law have hear the
two
not born fruit neither from quantum
theory nor general relativity nor string
theory
maybe constructor theory has something
to add here and it does that's where we
will leave it today so that next time i
can get straight into
readings from the book itself actual
readings from the science of cannon cat
so even though this is misleadingly
titled you know something to do with the
science of canon cartier we didn't
actually get 20 readings so until next
time bye-bye oh and one thing i'll make
a personal appeal
if you'd like to support this enterprise
for want of another word to describe it
see my patreon or paypal the links are
there on my website here at
www.bretthall.org
[Music]
um